updates (#412)
LIT-Protocol/docs: docs/security/backup-and-recover.md

## Verifiable Backups

All keys (except the BLS encryption key) in the network are derived hierarchically from a set of root keys. These root keys are generated during each distributed key generation process (DKG) in which each Lit node generates and holds a share of each key. To ensure these key shares are safe and can be recovered as needed, they're encrypted and backed up regularly using a dedicated recovery party and verifiable encryption. The verifiable encryption process ensures that the ciphertext (in this case, each encrypted key share) meets certain properties which allow the protocol to confirm that all encrypted root key shares are genuine. Every time new root keys are produced, nodes update the backups they have stored with the new data.

The backups ensure that if the network were to ever fall below threshold it could be recovered by decrypting the backups (with the help of the recovery party) and importing them into a fresh set of nodes.  

> ## The Recovery Party
> To assist with the recovery process, there is a designated set of recovery party members who facilitate the root key share decryption process. More than two-thirds of the members of the recovery party must participate to successfully decrypt the stored backups. Additionally, each backup is encrypted with a Blinder that is held by each node operator.
> 
> ## Encrypting the Backups
> The process for encrypting the root key backups involves:
> 
> 1. Each member of the recovery party (RP) creates a public encryption key and the decryption key shares using Distributed Key Generation (DKG).
> 2. This public key is used for encrypting the root key backups.
> 3. Each Node creates a Blinder, which is used to additionally encrypt the backup.
> 4. The encrypted backups are stored securely by the Lit Protocol development company.
> 
> ## Recovery Process
> If the network needs to be restored:
> 
> 1. Each RP member validates their identities with a Lit node and produces decryption shares for the required root key shares.
> 2. Node operators spin up a new node environment and input their Blinder and encrypted backup, reaching out to each RP member for their share of the decryption key. The decryption key shares are combined above the threshold, combined with the Blinder, to fully decrypt the ciphertext backups.  Recovery, therefore, requires participation of ⅔ of the Recovery Party, ⅔ of the node operators, and Lit Protocol to supply the encrypted backups.
> 3. With the decrypted root key shares in the new node environment, the network can be restored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The Recovery Party

To assist with the recovery process, there is a designated set of recovery party members who facilitate the root key share decryption process. More than two-thirds of the members of the recovery party must participate to successfully decrypt the stored backups. Additionally, each backup is encrypted with a Blinder that is held by each node operator.

## Encrypting the Backups

The process for encrypting the root key backups involves:

1. Each member of the recovery party (RP) creates a public encryption key and the decryption key shares using Distributed Key Generation (DKG).
2. This public key is used for encrypting the root key backups.
3. Each Node creates a Blinder, which is used to additionally encrypt the backup.
4. The encrypted backups are stored securely by the Lit Protocol development company.

## Recovery Process

If the network needs to be restored:

1. Each RP member validates their identities with a Lit node and produces decryption shares for the required root key shares.
2. Node operators spin up a new node environment and input their Blinder and encrypted backup, reaching out to each RP member for their share of the decryption key. The decryption key shares are combined above the threshold, combined with the Blinder, to fully decrypt the ciphertext backups.  Recovery, therefore, requires participation of ⅔ of the Recovery Party, ⅔ of the node operators, and Lit Protocol to supply the encrypted backups.
3. With the decrypted root key shares in the new node environment, the network can be restored.
```

# Backup and Recovery

Staking $LITKEY provides the first level of resilience for the network, ensuring that should a node want to leave the network, they do so gracefully. For an additional layer of security, a backup and recovery process has been implemented to ensure that the network can be recovered even in the case that a threshold of the active node set goes permanently offline.

## Verifiable Backups

All keys (except the BLS encryption key) in the network are derived hierarchically from a set of root keys. These root keys are generated during each distributed key generation process (DKG) in which each Lit node generates and holds a share of each key. To ensure these key shares are safe and can be recovered as needed, they're encrypted and backed up regularly using a dedicated recovery party and verifiable encryption. The verifiable encryption process ensures that the ciphertext (in this case, each encrypted key share) meets certain properties which allow the protocol to confirm that all encrypted root key shares are genuine. Every time new root keys are produced, nodes update the backups they have stored with the new data.

> The backups ensure that if the network were to ever fall below threshold it could be recovered by decrypting the backups (with the help of the recovery party) and importing them into a fresh set of nodes.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The backups ensure that if the available key shares were to ever fall below threshold the network could be recovered by importing the backups into a fresh set of nodes and decrypting them with the help of the node operators and the recovery party.
```
Two corrections here:
1) We still need to node operators to recover as they hold the blinders.
2) We first import the encrypted key shares into the nodes and then decrypt them. The key shares are not decrypted outside the nodes.

## The Recovery Party

> To assist with the recovery process, there is a designated set of recovery party members who facilitate the root key share decryption process. More than two-thirds of the members of the recovery party must participate to successfully decrypt the stored backups. Additionally, each backup is encrypted with a Blinder that is held by each node operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To assist with the recovery process, a designated set of recovery party members is responsible for facilitating the decryption of encrypted root key shares. For a successful recovery, more than two-thirds of these members must participate—enabling a threshold-based decryption process that ensures no single party can perform recovery unilaterally.

Each encrypted backup is additionally protected using a **Blinder**, a separate layer of encryption that ensures even if the recovery party is compromised, the underlying secrets cannot be decrypted without cooperation from the Lit nodes themselves. The Blinder is a symmetric encryption key (or key share) that is held securely by each node operator. During recovery, after the recovery party has met quorum and facilitated partial decryption of a backup, the node operators must also contribute their Blinder shares to remove this final encryption layer.

This two-step safeguard ensures that:
    • The recovery party alone cannot decrypt the root key shares.
    • The Lit nodes alone also cannot decrypt the backups without the recovery party.
    • Only when both parties participate (recovery party quorum + node-held Blinder shares) can the backups be fully decrypted.

This mechanism upholds the system’s threshold security model, even during sensitive operations like key recovery.
```

Reviewer: Getting confirmation from team that this is accurate

Reviewer 2: I confirm that the suggestion above is correct.

## Encrypting the Backups

The process for encrypting the root key backups involves:

> 1. Each member of the recovery party (RP) creates a public encryption key and the decryption key shares using Distributed Key Generation (DKG).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The nodes generate a public encryption key and the corresponding private decryption key shares using Distributed Key Generation (DKG) and provide each Recovery Party member with a decryption share.
```

> 2. This public key is used for encrypting the root key backups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. This public key is used for encrypting the root keys to generate the backups.
```

> 3. Each Node creates a Blinder, which is used to additionally encrypt the backup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Each node generates a Blinder, which is used to apply an additional encryption layer to its backup.
```

4. The encrypted backups are stored securely by the Lit Protocol development company.

## Recovery Process

If the network needs to be restored:

1. Each RP member validates their identities with a Lit node and produces decryption shares for the required root key shares.

> 2. Node operators spin up a new node environment and input their Blinder and encrypted backup, reaching out to each RP member for their share of the decryption key. The decryption key shares are combined above the threshold, combined with the Blinder, to fully decrypt the ciphertext backups.  Recovery, therefore, requires participation of ⅔ of the Recovery Party, ⅔ of the node operators, and Lit Protocol to supply the encrypted backups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Node operators spin up a new node environment and input their Blinder and encrypted backup, reaching out to each RP member for their share of the decryption key. Once the threshold of decryption shares is met, the backup is partially decrypted. The node’s Blinder is then applied to complete the decryption process. Recovery, therefore, requires participation of ⅔ of the Recovery Party, ⅔ of the node operators, and Lit Protocol to supply the encrypted backups.
```

> 1. Each RP member validates their identities with a Lit node and produces decryption shares for the required root key shares.
> 2. Node operators spin up a new node environment and input their Blinder and encrypted backup, reaching out to each RP member for their share of the decryption key. The decryption key shares are combined above the threshold, combined with the Blinder, to fully decrypt the ciphertext backups.  Recovery, therefore, requires participation of ⅔ of the Recovery Party, ⅔ of the node operators, and Lit Protocol to supply the encrypted backups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Node operators spin up a new node environment and input their Blinder and encrypted backup. The nodes start waiting for decryption shares from the Recovery Party members.
2. Each Recovery Party member produces a decryption share for each root key share by combining the root key share's ciphertext with their own decryption key share. Then each Recovery Party member uploads the decryption shares they generated to the nodes. (Note that decryption shares are produced by and different from decryption key shares).
3. Each node receives such decryption shares from the Recovery Party members for each encrypted root key share that it holds. The decryption key shares a node received for a root key share are combined above the threshold, combined with the Blinder, to fully decrypt the ciphertext in the backups. Recovery, therefore, requires participation of ⅔ of the Recovery Party, ⅔ of the node operators, and ⅔ of the encrypted backups.
```
Keep in mind that the backups can be made public. That's the plan but we don''t want to commit to that at this point.
